[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Man at his birth
is supple and tender.
But in death, he is
a rigid and hard.
Thus, suppleness and
tenderness accompany life.
But rigidity and
hardness accompany death.
I was quoting Lao-tzu.
The philosophy of the
strength of weakness.
You know, it's a strange thing
how I think men in the West,
and particularly men
in the United States,
don't realize how much
softness is strength.
One of old Lao-tzu favorite
analogies was water.
And he spoke of
water as the weakest
of all things in the world.
And yet, there is nothing
to be compared with it
in overcoming what
is hard and strong.
You can cut water with a knife.
And it lets the knife
go right through.
But when the knife
is withdrawn, there's
not even the trace of a wound.
And Lao-tzu also said
that while being a man,
one should retain a certain
essential feminine element.
And he who does this will become
a channel for the whole world.
The ideal of the 100% tough
guy, the rigid, rugged fellow
with muscles like rocks,
is really a weakness.
Probably we assume the
sort of tough exterior
as a hard shell to
protect ourselves, not
so much from the
outside, as from fear
of weakness on the inside.
What happens if
an engineer builds
a completely rigid bridge?
If, for example, the Golden
Gate or the George Washington
bridges didn't sway in the wind?
If they had no
give, no yielding,
they'd come crashing down.
And so you can always be
sure that when a man pretends
to be a 100% man, he's
in doubt of his manhood.
If he can allow
himself to be weak,
he can allow himself
what is really
the greatest strength,
not only of human beings,
but of all living things.
And so it is upon the philosophy
of the strength of weakness
that came from China to Japan,
through the migration of Zen
Buddhism, that there has
largely been inspired
one of the most astonishing
forms of self-defense
that the world knows,
what is called judo,
or, perhaps more
popularly, jujitsu.
The word "judo" is
fascinating because it means,
"ju", the gentle, "do, way.
Do is the Japanese way of
pronouncing the Chinese Dao.
And so it is the gentle Dao,
the philosophy of the Dao as
applied to self defense.
Now, this philosophy
has various components.
And one of the most basic things
to the whole practice of judo
is an understanding of balance.
Balance, indeed, is
a fundamental idea
in Daoist philosophy.
Because as I've pointed out from
time to time in these programs,
the philosophy of the
Dao has a basic respect
for the balance of nature.
You don't upset that balance.
You try to find out what
it is and go along with it.
In other words, you
avoid such mistakes
as wholesale slaughter
of an insect pest
or introducing rabbits into
a country like Australia
without thought as to whether
the rabbit has a natural enemy.
And through such interferences
with the balance of nature,
you find yourself in trouble.
So the philosophy of
balance, respect for balance,
is the number one thing that all
students of judo have to learn.
And sometimes this is
illustrated with a ball.
You see, wherever I push
it, the ball yields.
But the ball never
loses its balance.
It's the safest form in the
world, completely contained
and never off center.
And thus to be completely
contained, never
able to be put off center,
never phased by anything,
this is what is aimed at in Zen.
This is also
symbolized sometimes
in the figure of the legendary
founder of Zen, Bodhidharma.
And Japanese toy
makers represent him
as a little dumpy toy figure
like a shmoo, weighted
in such a way that
however you hit it,
it always comes upright.
And so in the same
way, the expert in Zen,
as well as in judo, as well as
in the Japanese art of fencing,
must be a man who
is never phased.
That has to say, he is never
brought to a point of doubt
where he hesitates,
where there's
an interval between the action
of life and his response to it.
Now, if we look at these
principles of judo,
the problem of balance
is easily demonstrated
with the question of lifting
a heavy roll of material.
We would be foolish to try
and just pick it up like this
because that shows
no understanding
of the laws of balance.
If you want to
lift such a thing,
you go below its center of
gravity, put your shoulder
to it, and you see,
undermine it, and so lift it.
And that principle
goes throughout judo.
Also involved as part of
the understanding of balance
in judo is to learn
to walk in such a way
that you're never off center.
That is to say, your
feet-- your legs,
rather, form a triangle and
your body is on the apex of it.
And when you turn, you
always try and keep
your feet approximately
underneath your shoulders.
And in this way, you're
never off balance.
Now then, the second principle,
beyond keeping balance
and understanding
balance, is not
to oppose strength to strength.
When one is attacked by the
enemy, you do not oppose him.
You yield to him
just like the ball
and you use his strength
and the principle of balance
to bring about his downfall.
Supposing, for example,
there is a blow
coming at me from
this direction.
Instead of defending oneself
and pushing the blow off,
the idea in judo is to
carry the blow this way.
The knee goes out, below the
adversary's point of balance.
And he goes bang, on his own
initiative and your cunning.
The same attitude
of, as it were,
relaxed gentleness is most
beautifully seen, for instance,
in watching cats.
When a cat falls off a tree,
the cat let's go of itself.
The cat becomes completely
relaxed and lands
on the ground with a heavy thud.
And thus, if, for example, a cat
were about to fall off a tree
and suddenly make up its
mind that it didn't want
to follow at tall, and go
all tense like this, [WHINE],
it would land and be just
a bag of broken bones
when it hit the ground.
And so in the same way
it's a philosophy of Zen
that we are all
falling off a tree.
That is to say the
moment we were born,
we were kicked off a precipice.
And we're falling and there's
nothing that can stop it.
And so instead of going into a
state of tension all the time
and clinging to all sorts of
things, which are actually
falling with us because the
whole world is impermanent,
be like a cat.
And so this cat-like attitude
to falling is all through judo.
If I, for example,
fall straight forward,
I learn to land like a cat.
[THUD] No trouble.
So in a way, this
is the philosophy
which is illustrated
in a Zen poem, which
says, while living, be a
dead man, thoroughly dead.
And then whatever you do, just
as you will, will be right.
It's again what I called
in the last program,
the backwards law,
the law of paradox.
That in one sense the more
dead you become, the more alive
you become.
The more soft you become,
the stronger you become.
Because this is the principal
of bend and survive.
It's illustrated by the image
of the pine tree and the willow.
In the snow, the
pine tree's trunk
strands rigid and the snow piles
up, and piles up, and piles up.
The branch doesn't give.
And finally, crack,
and it's done for.
But the willow, as soon as
a little snow accumulates
on the branch, down it goes.
The snow falls off and the
branch springs up again.
So this isn't quite
the idea of limpness.
It's not softness in
the sense of being just
limp and flaccid, but of
being springy, of having give.
And thus, in this
way, you might say
that judo would turnaround
our ordinary proverb,
necessity is the
mother of invention,
and say, laziness is
the mother of invention.
How to achieve what you want
to achieve by the easiest
possible way, by letting go.
And this after all is the
height of intelligence.
Now, I think it would be
interesting to see this
in a more practical
demonstration than I can give,
by watching one of the great
modern masters of judo,
Mr. Mifune in contest
with a number of pretty
tough customers.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
A little old man
of 70 years old,
here he's in contest with
a husky, young Britisher
by the name of Palmer,
who's been studying judo
in Japan for about 10 years.
And little Mr. Mifune who
is 70, and very frail,
he only weighs just a
little over 100 pounds,
watch him work with
this tough guy.
No.
Watch his balance and
how he bent to survive,
pretended defeat, and
overthrew his opponent.
No.
He can't catch him off balance.
He's trying to trip him.
But Mifune's feat are
always in the right place.
That was one of the
most astonishing
throws I've ever seen because
there was practically no body
contact.
Mifune simply seem to
do it with his wrists.
Again, notice how he goes
below the point of balance,
with the knee
underneath the hips.
They salute one another.
And then another
contestant comes out.
Look at this one.
This is a Japanese, but pretty
close to 7 feet, a really
husky fellow.
And incidentally, by virtue
of wearing a black belt,
that means that he's attained
at least the rank of first dan.
Actually, I think he's
fourth dan, as it's called.
The ranks go higher.
You start with one,
two, three, four.
And you can get up to about 14.
Again, his efforts to put
Mr. Mifune off balance
are absolutely to no avail.
This man cannot be phased.
Again, he goes down.
He stoops.
And that's the end
of the big fellow.
Now you'll notice
throughout this
that the important
central, fundamental thing
in the Mifune's technique,
huh, is he never stops.
He never hesitates.
He responds to the attack
without any interval.
This also would be a
characteristic of dancing.
Good dancing partners look as if
they were one single organism.
There is no interval between
the man's lead and the woman's
following.
And when you are accustomed
to a partner with whom you've
worked some time and who
is expert in dancing,
it almost feels as if she
were part of your own body
because she moves so completely
responsibly to your initiative.
In just the same way, the leaf
on a tree responds to the wind.
The wind blows and
the leaf doesn't just
stop and think, well, should
I get around to wagging?
Immediately the wind comes,
the leaf goes with it.
And the same way when you
watch a ball floating on water.
It responds instantly to
the slightest modulation
of the waves.
And this attitude of
their being no interval
is what is the real
meaning of the Buddhist
ideal of detachment.
It doesn't mean that a man is
detached from the world, who
has no emotions,
who has no appetite.
What are attachments are
almost in the surgical sense
of an attachment or a
lesion inside the body,
where something sticks together
where it shouldn't stick.
Stickiness is the
best translation
of attachment in Buddhism.
And so the expert in judo
has to be without sticky.
He has to flow with
life in the same way
that the ball responds to
the movements of the water.
And then he's never caught out.
Aside from judo, Zen has had
perhaps even more influence
on the Japanese the
fencing called kendo.
"Ken" is the sword, "do,"
the Way of the Sword.
And this surprises many
people because they
think how can the pacific
philosophy of Buddhism
be connected with
anything so ferocious
as the art of fighting?
But it was.
Shortly after Zen Buddhism
was introduced into Japan,
it became the
favorite way of life
of the samurai, those
feudal Japanese warriors who
were for many centuries
there involved
in perpetual civil war between
the various feudal lords.
And as they lived in constant
danger, constant insecurity,
they took up Zen as a way of
peace in the midst of fighting.
But what about the
ethics of this?
It seems to me quite
a simple problem.
Either we're going to have
fighting and war or we're not.
Now, if we've made up our minds
that it's necessary to fight,
that there must
be soldiers, then
surely there is no
alternative but to do it well.
In other words, if you're going
to chop somebody's head off,
chop it off with
complete decision
because a half-hearted chop is
very agonizing for the victim.
So in the same way,
as somebody said,
if you're going to tell a
lie, make it a good one.
No shilly-shallying
about these things.
And that's the attitude of Zen.
If you're going to do an
evil deed, really do it.
If you're going to make a
mistake, make a good one.
And so the whole
philosophy of the sword
is deeply imbued with Zen.
Let's take a look at one
of these Japanese swords.
They venerate these things.
Look how beautifully this
is wrapped in its silk case,
with brocade on
it, a lovely thing.
This one has a blade, oh,
probably about 400 years old.
And it was lent to
me by Mr. Shibata.
It's a terrifying
instrument, just
a great, big, heavy,
two-handed razor.
Look at this.
Worn at the side, you don't
draw it and then go into action.
You can draw it and go
into action at one moment.
And its principle
of balance is such
that the right hand holds
it at its convenient center
of balance.
And the left hand can
simply control the movement
very rapidly, with a good
principle of leverage.
So that practically
all the defense
of blows from either
side is simply
accomplished by slight
movements of the blade from side
to side, giving great
economy of movement.
There is sometimes only one
rather startling and dramatic
looking form of defense
used against a blow
to the head, which is one
that turns into a cut, thus.
The principal
movements of the sword,
always taking the
center of gravity
as what is called in Japanese
seika tanden or the belly,
the belly center,
the solar plexus.
The blows are to the neck this
way, to the neck that way,
to the side, the wrist
cut, and only one thrust
straight at the throat.
And then the blow
to the head, ho!
You've probably heard that
shout on samurai films.
And you wonder
perhaps what that is?
That comes from Zen.
There was an old Chinese
Zen master called Rinzai.
And when people asked him what
is the meaning of Buddhism,
he'd say, ho!
They were profoundly
disconcerted.
If you're a
philosophical gentleman,
you don't answer polite
questions like that.
But that again is a trap,
to see if the questioner can
be phased and thrown off center.
And so in the same way,
the samurai in attack
uses the same terrifying
shout, as it were,
to startle his opponent
into losing his balance
and thinking for a moment.
And if he thinks and
hesitates, he's lost.
Now, of course, the
practice of this
is carried out
with bamboo swords.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
And we can watch a young
Japanese fencing student
putting on his bamboo armor
and getting ready for a bout.
They wear this helmet, which
is somewhat like the old style
steel helmets worn by the
samurai in medieval times.
And they wear breast plates
of lacquer and heavily
padded gauntlets.
And then in the fencing
room, they salute one another
and start in.
And now you can see this
two-handed sword in use.
This then, again, as in judo,
one must move without stopping.
So in fencing, there is to
be no interval between attack
and defense.
Watching good fencers, they seem
to dance together and, as it
were, be going through
the motions as one body.
And then there's just
that critical moment
when one man loses his
guard and he's done for.
So the attitude is called, in
Chinese, "mo chih chu," which
means going straight ahead.
A Zen poem says, under
the sword lifted high,
is hell making you tremble?
But go straight ahead and
there is the land of bliss.
No stopping, complete
response to the moment.
And this is particularly
true, for example,
if a single man is surrounded
with several opponents.
He can't hesitate
and wonder what
is this fellow going to do next
because when he's defending
himself here, and
he, as it were,
his mind is stuck
on an opponent here,
he can be caught unawares
from an opponent over there.
So what he has is what is called
an unstuck mind, an ability
to be alert to the whole
situation around you
so that if your
mind gets fastened
at any particular point,
you're caught by that point.
And so this unstuck mind is
the fundamental requirement,
not only for the
artist in fencing,
but also for the
practitioner of Buddhism.
Now in the hands of
a man who is really
both adept in Zen
and adept in fencing,
the sword of destruction
can in a curious way
to become a symbol of mercy.
For the highest school
of Japanese fencing
is called the no sword
school, to be able never
to use the sword.
A good story about this
as it was a great samurai
traveling on a ferry boat.
And just as they
were putting off,
another drunken, rowdy samurai
stepped on and started bragging
about his powers.
And he turned to
the first samurai
and said, well, what's your
school of sportsmanship?
And the first samurai
politely answered,
mine is the no sword school.
Ha, ha, he said.
I'd like to see your
no sword school.
And immediately he
challenged him to a fight
and pulled out his sword.
And the first samurai
said, excuse me,
but if we find on this boat, we
made hurt innocent bystanders.
Why don't we go and fight
on that island over there?
So they got the boatmen
to move over to the island
and as they arrived, the ruffian
jumped off onto the island,
all ready to begin the fight.
And at that moment,
the other samurai
grabbed the oar from the
boatmen and pushed the boat away
into the water and left
the rowdy stranded.
There, he said, is
my no sword school.
This applies, too, even
in the actual making
of the sword by the swordsmiths,
whose craft in Japan
is something of a ritual.
And as an example of
no sword, in the work
of a very skilled swordsmith,
let me tell this story.
There were two
swordsmiths in old Japan,
one who was considered the
greatest and the other just
a little inferior.
And they had a test
one day as to which
of them made the best blade.
And they first took the blade
of the second best swordsman
and put it in the stream like
this and set a piece of paper
floating down towards it.
And the sword simply slid
through the piece of paper.
And it joined
together and went on.
How could that be improved?
They put in the sort of
the greatest swordsmith.
How good he go better than that?
Well, what happened
was the piece of paper
came down like this and it
went round it and went on.
[MUSIC PLAYING]